README.md, before:

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/xair-api.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/xair-api)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/onyx-and-iris/xair-api-python/blob/dev/LICENSE)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![Imports: isort](https://img.shields.io/badge/%20imports-isort-%231674b1?style=flat&labelColor=ef8336)](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/)
![Tests Status](./tests/xair/MR18.svg?dummy=8484744)

# Xair API

This package offers a python interface for the [Behringer XAir](https://www.behringer.com/series.html?category=R-BEHRINGER-XAIRSERIES), [Midas MR](https://www.midasconsoles.com/catalog.html?catalog=Category&category=C-MIDAS-MIXERS-DIGITALSTAGEBOXMIXERS) series of digital rack mixers. I only have access to an MR18 for testing so if there is an error in the kind maps feel free to raise an issue or PR.

For an outline of past/future changes refer to: [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md)

## Prerequisites

-   Python 3.10 or greater

## Installation

```
pip install xair-api
```

## Usage

### Connection

A toml file named config.toml, placed into the current working directory of your code may be used to configure the mixers ip. A valid `config.toml` may resemble:

```toml
[connection]
ip = "<ip address>"
```

Alternatively you may pass it as a keyword argument.

### Example

```python
import xair_api


def main():
    kind_id = "XR18"
    ip = "<ip address>"

    with xair_api.connect(kind_id, ip=ip) as mixer:
        mixer.strip[8].config.name = "sm7b"
        mixer.strip[8].mix.on = True
        print(
            f"strip 09 ({mixer.strip[8].config.name}) on has been set to {mixer.strip[8].mix.on}"
        )


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

## API

Currently the following devices are supported:

-   `MR18`
-   `XR18`
-   `XR16`
-   `XR12`

The `X32` is partially supported. This document covers specifically the `XAir` series, however.

### XAirRemote class (higher level)

`mixer.lr`

A class representing Main LR channel

`mixer.strip`

A Strip tuple containing a class for each input strip channel

`mixer.bus`

A Bus tuple containing a class for each output bus channel

`mixer.dca`

A DCA tuple containing a class for each DCA group

`mixer.fx`

An FX tuple containing a class for each FX channel

`mixer.fxsend`

An FXSend tuple containing a class for each FX Send channel

`mixer.fxreturn`

An FXReturn tuple containing a class for each FX Return channel

`mixer.auxreturn`

A class representing auxreturn channel

`mixer.config`

A class representing the main config settings

### `LR`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `EQ`, `Mix`)

### `Strip`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `Gate`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `GEQ`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`, `Automix`)

### `Bus`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `FXSend`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `FXRtn`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `AuxRtn`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `Subclasses`

For each subclass the corresponding properties are available.

`Config`

-   `name`: string
-   `color`: int, from 0, 16
-   `inputsource`: int
-   `usbreturn`: int

`Preamp`

-   `on`: bool
-   `usbtrim`: float, from -18.0 to 18.0
-   `usbinput`: bool
-   `invert`: bool
-   `highpasson`: bool
-   `highpassfilter`: int, from 20 to 400

`Gate`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('gate', 'exp2', 'exp3', 'exp4', 'duck')
-   `threshold`: float, from -80.0 to 0.0
-   `range`: int, from 3 to 60
-   `attack`: int, from 0 to 120
-   `hold`: float, from 0.02 to 2000
-   `release`: int, from 5 to 4000
-   `keysource`, from 0 to 22
-   `filteron`: bool
-   `filtertype`: int, from 0 to 8
-   `filterfreq`: float, from 20 to 20000

`Dyn`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('comp', 'exp')
-   `det`: str, one of ('peak', 'rms')
-   `env`: str, one of ('lin', 'log')
-   `threshold`: float, from -60.0 to 0.0
-   `ratio`: int, from 0 to 11
-   `knee`: int, from 0 to 5
-   `mgain`: float, from 0.0 to 24.0
-   `attack`: int, from 0 to 120
-   `hold`: float, from 0.02 to 2000
-   `release`: int, from 5 to 4000
-   `mix`: int, from 0 to 100
-   `keysource`: int, from 0 to 22
-   `auto`: bool
-   `filteron`: bool
-   `filtertype`: int, from 0 to 8
-   `filterfreq`: float, from 20 to 20000

`Insert`

-   `on`: bool
-   `sel`: int

`GEQ`
The following method names preceded by `slider_`

-   `20`, `25`, `31_5`, `40`, `50`, `63`, `80`, `100`, `125`, `160`,
-   `200`, `250`, `315`, `400`, `500`, `630`, `800`, `1k`, `1k25`, `1k6`, `2k`,
-   `2k5`, `3k15`, `4k`, `5k`, `6k3`, `8k`, `10k`, `12k5`, `16k`, `20k`: float, from -15.0 to 15.0

for example: `slider_20`, `slider_6k3` etc..

`EQ`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('peq', 'geq', 'teq')

For the subclasses: `low`, `low2`, `lomid`, `himid`, `high2`, `high` the following properties are available:

-   `type`: int, from 0 to 5
-   `frequency`: float, from 20.0 to 20000.0
-   `gain`: float, -15.0 to 15.0
-   `quality`: float, from 0.3 to 10.0

for example: `eq.low2.type`

`Mix`

-   `on`: bool
-   `fader`: float, -inf, to 10.0
-   `lr`: bool

`Group`

-   `dca`: int, from 0 to 15
-   `mute`: int, from 0 to 15

`Automix`

-   `group`: int, from 0 to 2
-   `weight`: float, from -12.0 to 12.0

### `DCA`

-   `on`: bool
-   `name`: str
-   `color`: int, from 0 to 15

### `Config`

The following method names preceded by `chlink`

-   `1_2`, `3_4`, `5_6`, `7_8`, `9_10`, `11_12`, `13_14`, `15_16`

The following method names preceded by `buslink`

-   `1_2`, `3_4`, `5_6`

for example: `chlink1_2`, `buslink5_6` etc..

-   `link_eq`: bool
-   `link_dyn`: bool
-   `link_fader_mute`: bool
-   `amixenable`: bool
-   `amixlock`: bool

For the subclass `monitor` the following properties are available

-   `level`: float, -inf to 10.0
-   `source`: int, from 0 to 14
-   `chmode` bool
-   `busmode` bool
-   `dim` bool
-   `mono` bool
-   `mute` bool
-   `dimfpl` bool

for example: `config.monitor.chmode`

#### `mute_group`

tuple containing a class for each mute group

-   `on`: bool, from 0 to 3

for example: `config.mute_group[0].on = True`

### XAirRemote class (lower level)

Send an OSC command directly to the mixer

-   `send(osc command, value)`

for example:

```python
mixer.send("/ch/01/mix/on", 1)
mixer.send("/bus/2/config/name", "somename")
```

Query the value of a command:

-   `query(osc command)`

for example:

```python
print(mixer.query("/ch/01/mix/on"))
```

### `Tests`

Unplug any expensive equipment before running tests.
Save your current settings to a snapshot first.

First make sure you installed the [development dependencies](https://github.com/onyx-and-iris/xair-api-python#installation)

To run all tests:

`pytest -v`.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details

## Documentation

[XAir OSC Commands](https://behringer.world/wiki/doku.php?id=x-air_osc)

[X32 OSC Commands](https://wiki.munichmakerlab.de/images/1/17/UNOFFICIAL_X32_OSC_REMOTE_PROTOCOL_%281%29.pdf)

## Special Thanks

[Peter Dikant](https://github.com/peterdikant) for writing the base class

Commit message:

delay kwarg added.
delay added to README

delay for test suites reduced to 0.008

main stereo added to adapter tests

README.md, after:

[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/xair-api.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/xair-api)
[![License: MIT](https://img.shields.io/badge/License-MIT-yellow.svg)](https://github.com/onyx-and-iris/xair-api-python/blob/dev/LICENSE)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/psf/black)
[![Imports: isort](https://img.shields.io/badge/%20imports-isort-%231674b1?style=flat&labelColor=ef8336)](https://pycqa.github.io/isort/)
![Tests Status](./tests/xair/MR18.svg?dummy=8484744)

# Xair API

This package offers a python interface for the [Behringer XAir](https://www.behringer.com/series.html?category=R-BEHRINGER-XAIRSERIES), [Midas MR](https://www.midasconsoles.com/catalog.html?catalog=Category&category=C-MIDAS-MIXERS-DIGITALSTAGEBOXMIXERS) series of digital rack mixers. I only have access to an MR18 for testing so if there is an error in the kind maps feel free to raise an issue or PR.

For an outline of past/future changes refer to: [CHANGELOG](CHANGELOG.md)

## Prerequisites

-   Python 3.10 or greater

## Installation

```
pip install xair-api
```

## Usage

### Connection

A toml file named config.toml, placed into the current working directory of your code may be used to configure the mixers ip. A valid `config.toml` may resemble:

```toml
[connection]
ip = "<ip address>"
```

Alternatively you may pass it as a keyword argument.

### Example

```python
import xair_api


def main():
    kind_id = "XR18"
    ip = "<ip address>"

    with xair_api.connect(kind_id, ip=ip) as mixer:
        mixer.strip[8].config.name = "sm7b"
        mixer.strip[8].mix.on = True
        print(
            f"strip 09 ({mixer.strip[8].config.name}) on has been set to {mixer.strip[8].mix.on}"
        )


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()
```

#### `xair_api.connect(kind_id, ip=ip, delay=delay)`

Currently the following devices are supported:

-   `MR18`
-   `XR18`
-   `XR16`
-   `XR12`

The `X32` is partially supported. However, this document covers specifically the `XAir` series.

The following keyword arguments may be passed:

-   `ip`: ip address of the mixer
-   `port`: mixer port, defaults to 10023 for x32 and 10024 for xair
-   `delay`: a delay between each command, defaults to 20ms.
    -   a note about delay, stability may rely on network connection. For wired connections the delay can be safely reduced.

## API

### XAirRemote class (higher level)

`mixer.lr`

A class representing Main LR channel

`mixer.strip`

A Strip tuple containing a class for each input strip channel

`mixer.bus`

A Bus tuple containing a class for each output bus channel

`mixer.dca`

A DCA tuple containing a class for each DCA group

`mixer.fx`

An FX tuple containing a class for each FX channel

`mixer.fxsend`

An FXSend tuple containing a class for each FX Send channel

`mixer.fxreturn`

An FXReturn tuple containing a class for each FX Return channel

`mixer.auxreturn`

A class representing auxreturn channel

`mixer.config`

A class representing the main config settings

### `LR`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `EQ`, `Mix`)

### `Strip`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `Gate`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `GEQ`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`, `Automix`)

### `Bus`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Dyn`, `Insert`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `FXSend`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `FXRtn`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `AuxRtn`

Contains the subclasses:
(`Config`, `Preamp`, `EQ`, `Mix`, `Group`)

### `Subclasses`

For each subclass the corresponding properties are available.

`Config`

-   `name`: string
-   `color`: int, from 0, 16
-   `inputsource`: int
-   `usbreturn`: int

`Preamp`

-   `on`: bool
-   `usbtrim`: float, from -18.0 to 18.0
-   `usbinput`: bool
-   `invert`: bool
-   `highpasson`: bool
-   `highpassfilter`: int, from 20 to 400

`Gate`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('gate', 'exp2', 'exp3', 'exp4', 'duck')
-   `threshold`: float, from -80.0 to 0.0
-   `range`: int, from 3 to 60
-   `attack`: int, from 0 to 120
-   `hold`: float, from 0.02 to 2000
-   `release`: int, from 5 to 4000
-   `keysource`, from 0 to 22
-   `filteron`: bool
-   `filtertype`: int, from 0 to 8
-   `filterfreq`: float, from 20 to 20000

`Dyn`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('comp', 'exp')
-   `det`: str, one of ('peak', 'rms')
-   `env`: str, one of ('lin', 'log')
-   `threshold`: float, from -60.0 to 0.0
-   `ratio`: int, from 0 to 11
-   `knee`: int, from 0 to 5
-   `mgain`: float, from 0.0 to 24.0
-   `attack`: int, from 0 to 120
-   `hold`: float, from 0.02 to 2000
-   `release`: int, from 5 to 4000
-   `mix`: int, from 0 to 100
-   `keysource`: int, from 0 to 22
-   `auto`: bool
-   `filteron`: bool
-   `filtertype`: int, from 0 to 8
-   `filterfreq`: float, from 20 to 20000

`Insert`

-   `on`: bool
-   `sel`: int

`GEQ`
The following method names preceded by `slider_`

-   `20`, `25`, `31_5`, `40`, `50`, `63`, `80`, `100`, `125`, `160`,
-   `200`, `250`, `315`, `400`, `500`, `630`, `800`, `1k`, `1k25`, `1k6`, `2k`,
-   `2k5`, `3k15`, `4k`, `5k`, `6k3`, `8k`, `10k`, `12k5`, `16k`, `20k`: float, from -15.0 to 15.0

for example: `slider_20`, `slider_6k3` etc..

`EQ`

-   `on`: bool
-   `mode`: str, one of ('peq', 'geq', 'teq')

For the subclasses: `low`, `low2`, `lomid`, `himid`, `high2`, `high` the following properties are available:

-   `type`: int, from 0 to 5
-   `frequency`: float, from 20.0 to 20000.0
-   `gain`: float, -15.0 to 15.0
-   `quality`: float, from 0.3 to 10.0

for example: `eq.low2.type`

`Mix`

-   `on`: bool
-   `fader`: float, -inf, to 10.0
-   `lr`: bool

`Group`

-   `dca`: int, from 0 to 15
-   `mute`: int, from 0 to 15

`Automix`

-   `group`: int, from 0 to 2
-   `weight`: float, from -12.0 to 12.0

### `DCA`

-   `on`: bool
-   `name`: str
-   `color`: int, from 0 to 15

### `Config`

The following method names preceded by `chlink`

-   `1_2`, `3_4`, `5_6`, `7_8`, `9_10`, `11_12`, `13_14`, `15_16`

The following method names preceded by `buslink`

-   `1_2`, `3_4`, `5_6`

for example: `chlink1_2`, `buslink5_6` etc..

-   `link_eq`: bool
-   `link_dyn`: bool
-   `link_fader_mute`: bool
-   `amixenable`: bool
-   `amixlock`: bool

For the subclass `monitor` the following properties are available

-   `level`: float, -inf to 10.0
-   `source`: int, from 0 to 14
-   `chmode` bool
-   `busmode` bool
-   `dim` bool
-   `mono` bool
-   `mute` bool
-   `dimfpl` bool

for example: `config.monitor.chmode`

#### `mute_group`

tuple containing a class for each mute group

-   `on`: bool, from 0 to 3

for example: `config.mute_group[0].on = True`

### XAirRemote class (lower level)

Send an OSC command directly to the mixer

-   `send(osc command, value)`

for example:

```python
mixer.send("/ch/01/mix/on", 1)
mixer.send("/bus/2/config/name", "somename")
```

Query the value of a command:

-   `query(osc command)`

for example:

```python
print(mixer.query("/ch/01/mix/on"))
```

### `Tests`

Unplug any expensive equipment before running tests.
Save your current settings to a snapshot first.

First make sure you installed the [development dependencies](https://github.com/onyx-and-iris/xair-api-python#installation)

To run all tests:

`pytest -v`.

## License

This project is licensed under the MIT License - see the [LICENSE](LICENSE) file for details

## Documentation

[XAir OSC Commands](https://behringer.world/wiki/doku.php?id=x-air_osc)

[X32 OSC Commands](https://wiki.munichmakerlab.de/images/1/17/UNOFFICIAL_X32_OSC_REMOTE_PROTOCOL_%281%29.pdf)

## Special Thanks

[Peter Dikant](https://github.com/peterdikant) for writing the base class
